The Project Gutenberg eBook of The miracle of Saint Anthony, by
Maurice Maeterlinck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The miracle of Saint Anthony

Author: Maurice Maeterlinck

Translator: Alexander Texeira de Mattos

Contributor: Arthur Bartlett Maurice

Release Date: April 14, 2023 [eBook #70550]

Language: English

Produced by: Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRACLE OF SAINT
ANTHONY ***






THE MIRACLE OF SAINT ANTHONY




THE WORKS OF MAURICE MAETERLINCK


ESSAYS

    THE TREASURE OF THE HUMBLE
    WISDOM AND DESTINY
    THE LIFE OF THE BEE
    THE BURIED TEMPLE
    THE DOUBLE GARDEN
    THE MEASURE OF THE HOURS
    ON EMERSON, AND OTHER ESSAYS
    OUR ETERNITY
    THE UNKNOWN GUEST
    THE WRACK OF THE STORM
    MOUNTAIN PATHS

PLAYS

    SISTER BEATRICE, AND ARDIANE AND BARBE BLEUE
    JOYZELLE, AND MONNA VANNA
    THE BLUE BIRD, A FAIRY PLAY
    MARY MAGDALENE
    PÉLLÉAS AND MÉLISANDE, AND OTHER PLAYS
    PRINCESS MALEINE
    THE INTRUDER, AND OTHER PLAYS
    AGLAVAINE AND SELYSETTE
    THE MIRACLE OF SAINT ANTHONY
    THE BETROTHAL; A SEQUEL TO THE BLUE BIRD

    POEMS

HOLIDAY EDITIONS

    OUR FRIEND THE DOG
    THE SWARM
    DEATH
    THOUGHTS FROM MAETERLINCK
    THE BLUE BIRD
    THE LIFE OF THE BEE
    NEWS OF SPRING AND OTHER NATURE STUDIES
    THE LIGHT BEYOND




[Illustration]

                             _The Miracle of
                              Saint Anthony_

                                   _By
                           Maurice Maeterlinck_

                              _Translated by
                      Alexander Teixeira de Mattos_

                          _With Introduction by
                         Arthur Bartlett Maurice_

                                _New York
                          Dodd, Mead and Company
                               Publishers_

                             COPYRIGHT, 1918
                     BY DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, INC.
                          _All Rights Reserved_




TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


This play was written some ten or twelve years ago, but has never been
published or performed in the original. A translation in two acts was
printed in Germany a few years before the war; but the present is the
only authorized version, in its final, one-act form, that has hitherto
appeared in any language.

                                             ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS.

CHELSEA, _27 February, 1918_.




CHARACTERS


    SAINT ANTHONY
    GUSTAVE
    ACHILLE
    THE DOCTOR
    THE RECTOR
    JOSEPH
    THE COMMISSARY OF POLICE
    A POLICE-SERGEANT
    A POLICEMAN
    MADEMOISELLE HORTENSE
    VIRGINIE
    LÉONTINE, an old lady
    VALENTINE, a young girl
    OTHER RELATIONS AND GUESTS

_The action takes place in the present century, in a small Flemish
provincial town._




INTRODUCTION


“The Miracle of St. Anthony”—whatever the exact date of its writing, and
that is a point which the author himself has probably forgotten,—belongs
in flavour and spirit, to that early period of the career of the Belgian
seer and mystic to which Mr. James Huneker referred when he wrote “There
is no denying the fact that at one time Maeterlinck meant for most people
a crazy crow, masquerading in tail feathers plucked from the Swan of
Avon.” For it was to Shakespeare that he was first compared, though the
title “the Belgian Shakespeare” was applied ironically by some, just
as later manifestations of his genius won for him the appellation of
“the Belgian Emerson.” But “The Miracle of St. Anthony” differs from the
other plays of what may be called “the early Maeterlinck.” Most of them,
to quote Mr. Edward Thomas, have a melancholy, a romance of unreality,
a morbidity, combined with innocence, which piques our indulgence. He
has no irony to put us on the defensive. But irony is the very essence
of “The Miracle of St. Anthony.” Nor does the scene of the little play
belong to that land of illusion, that mystic border country, half
twilight and half mirage, in which so many of the early plays were laid.
The St. Anthony from whom the satire takes its title may be the blessed
St. Anthony of Padua, but the atmosphere is unmistakably the gray, sombre
Flemish atmosphere that Maeterlinck knew in his early youth, while the
Marionettes who speak the lines were drawn, not from Fairy-land, but from
some town of the Low-Countries.

Maeterlinck’s nationality was not a mere chance of birth, but a heritage
of many generations. The Flemish family of which he was born in Ghent on
August 29, 1862, had for six centuries been settled in the neighborhood.
His childhood was passed at Oostacker, in a house on the bank of a canal
connecting Ghent with Terneuzen. So near was the water that the ships
seemed to be sliding through the garden itself. The seven years spent
at the Jesuit college of St. Barbe were not happy years, but there were
developed his first literary aspirations, and there he formed certain
friendships that lasted into later life. At the University, where he
studied for the Bar, he met Émile Verhaeren, who was destined to stand
out with King Albert, Cardinal Mercier, and Maeterlinck, as one of the
great figures of the land when Belgium came to experience her agony.

But it was not in Maeterlinck to settle down to a lawyer’s work and a
bourgeois life. “Like Rodenbach,” said M. Edouard Schuré, “he had dreamed
alongside the sleeping waters of Belgium and in the dead cities, and,
though his dream did not become a paralysing reverie, thanks to his
vigorous and healthy body, he was already troubled in such a way that
he was unlikely to accept the conditions of a legal career.” So, when
at twenty four, he made his first trip to Paris, though the visit was
professedly in the interests of his studies, it was with the result that
he plunged definitely and whole heartedly into literature. To Villiers de
l’Isle Adam, and others of the ultra modern school, he was introduced
by an old _copain_ of the Jesuit college, Gregoire Le Roy. Le Roy read
to the group Maeterlinck’s “The Massacre of the Innocents,” a perfectly
Flemish piece of objective realism. It was applauded, and soon after
appeared in “La Pléïde,” a short-lived review which also printed some of
the poems collected in “Serres Chaudes.”

That first stay in Paris was one of about six months. Returning to Ghent,
he conformed to the wishes of his family to the extent of dabbling a
little at the Bar. But his heart was with “La Jeune Belgique,” to which
he had been introduced by Rodenbach, author of “Bruges la Morte,” and for
which he was writing his poems. Then in 1889, when he was twenty-seven
years of age, “Serres Chaudes” was published, and with it went the last
tie binding him to the law.

Continuing to live in his native Oostacker, his days were divided between
writing, tending his bees, and outdoor pastimes. As a member of the
Civic Guard of Ghent he was as poor an amateur soldier as Balzac had
been when enrolled in the National Guard of the France of his time. His
musket was allowed to rust until the night before an inspection. Material
surroundings meant little to him. As with Barrie, the four walls were
enough. He could people the homely room to suit his fancy. In imagination
a table became a mountain range, a chair the nave of a superb cathedral,
a side-board a limitless expanse of surging ocean. Through the window he
could look out over a country suggesting the scene of his early play,
“Les Sept Princesses,” “A dark land of marshes, of pools, and of oak and
pine forests. Between enormous willows a straight and gloomy canal, on
which a great ship of war advances.”

“La Princesse Maleine,” which also appeared in 1889, had been first
privately printed by the author himself, on a hand press. With it
Maeterlinck was launched into the fierce light of fame. Octave Mirbeau
wrote of it in the _Figaro_ of Paris. He said that no one could be
more unknown than the author, but that his book was a masterpiece,
“comparable—shall I dare say it? superior in beauty to the most beautiful
in Shakespeare.” There were less generous critics who suggested that
the play was Shakespeare, because it had been made with scraps of
Shakespeare. A champion of Maeterlinck retorted that in comparison with
Maleine and Hjalmar the characters of Shakespeare were marionettes.
So the storm raged, to the author’s infinite disgust. Finally in
a spirit of modesty and frank acknowledgment he called the play
“Shakespearterie.” There was no pose in that assumption of humility.
From all testimony he has ever been the same. Invited to a dinner his
acceptance has been conditional on absolute simplicity. “After all, I
am a peasant.” It was Gerard Harry who quoted that. Again, at the end
of a first night of one of his plays, he has been described as “modest,
simple, altogether without display in dress or manner.” His gestures
were gentle with reflection, his voice low and rarely heard. He had no
pride of success, but an air at once uneasy and detached, as if tired
of being there. His deep blue eye was cold and mournful, like a mirror
that retains the images of indefinite and impalpable things, as Barbey
d’Aurevilly says the eyes always are of those who look more within than
without. His brow was deep and square and shone pale. He made the
observer think of his own untranslatable words:

    Sous l’eau du songe qui s’élève
    Mon âme a peur, mon âme a peur.

The same writer says that, by way of contrast, the playwright keeps
bees and teaches a dog to sing; he calls him a sportsman, a man always
getting about, a great drinker of ale—a great boy, a Bohemian. Here also
may be discerned the writer in praise of the sword, the fist, and the
automobile, the friend of the bull-dog and the creator of Tylo. That was
describing the Maeterlinck of the early days. He seems never to have
greatly changed. Was not almost the last picture of him that we had
before the outbreak of the Great War one of poet playing with pugilist at
the manly art of self-defense—the author of “L’Oiseau Bleu” sparring and
wrestling daily with the French champion Carpentier?

New influences began to show in Maeterlinck’s work. His Introduction to
his translation from the Flemish of Ruysbroeck l’Admirable’s “L’Ornement
des Noces Spirituelles” made public his interest in Plato, Plotinous,
Novalis, Jacob Behman, and Coleridge. He published a translation of
Novalis’s “Disciples et Sais.” His feeling for Emerson had become such
that he wrote an Introduction to the Essays of the American that had been
translated into French by I. Will. To that period of his career as a
playwright belong “Les Sept Princesses,” the little plays, “L’Intruse,”
and “Les Aveugles,” “Pélléas et Mélisande,” “Alladine et Palomides,”
“Interieur,” and “La Mort de Tintagiles.” Then, in 1896, he left
Oostacker for good, and settled in Paris. In the same year he published
“Le Tresor des Humbles,” his first volume of Essays, and “Aglavaine et
Selysette.” In a letter to Madame Maeterlinck he said that Aglavaine
brought him “a new atmosphere, a will to happiness, a power to hope.”
Henceforth her light will direct him in a “serene, happy and consoling
course.” Also it was about that time that his life was joined to the life
of Georgette Leblanc.

In “La Vie Belge,” published in 1905, Camille Lemonnier told of
Maeterlinck’s first meeting with the talented woman who was to become
his wife. It took place in a house in the Rue Ducale in Brussels,
the home of Edmond Picard, the great barrister and patron of Belgian
literature. One midnight, after a performance of Strindberg’s “Father”
at the Théâtre du Parc, all were invited there for supper. Maeterlinck,
who still lived in Flanders, had left his bees, and was there, grave,
silent, dreaming, a little out of his element, as he always was in the
city. He was truly himself only in the country, his pipe in his coarse
peasant fingers, filling its black bowl with a fresh pinch of tobacco
from time to time. I had known him at the house of the painter, Claus,
at whose door he sometimes leaped from his wheel, bare-necked, muscular,
broad of shoulders and loins, a regular country boy from the village.
This great, silent, contemplative spirit little knew that he was about
to see appear, under the guise of the charming Georgette Blanc, the very
visage of his destiny. A great silence spread from the far end of the
hall, and suddenly she entered, stately and slow, with the jewel of her
_ferronière_ on her forehead, like a sign of the empire, in the long
swishing of her train. Picard presented them; she gave a little cry; and
he looked at her, embarrassed, with his deep-set peasant eyes, bowing
awkwardly, while, with a deep reverence like a rite, the beautiful
actress, with the ceremonious grace of a little queen of Byzantium,
dedicated to him, without a word, the homage of her artist’s worship.
Maeterlinck looked at her a great deal, but scarcely spoke to her during
supper.

But if his tongue was backward, there were other ways of wooing. “Le
Tresor des Humbles” was dedicated to her. “La Sagesse et la Destinée”
was dedicated to her, “as the result of her collaboration in thought and
example: he had only to listen to her words and follow her life with
his eyes when he wrote the book; for to do so was to follow the words,
the movements, the habits of wisdom itself.” At any rate the woman
understood. Perhaps she helped matters along a little. Perhaps her poise
served to put the shy peasant at his ease. It was a wise union, a union
destined for happiness. “Truly,” said Gerard Harry of it, “henceforward
he looks upon life less desperately and less fearfully.” The glimpses
that Mr. Edward Thomas gave of the _ménage_ show Maeterlinck as he was
in the last year or two of world peace, come to fifty years, in the full
vigor of his mature powers, at the height of his popularity and material
success. Nearly all his books are multiplied and repeated, by new
editions and translations into many languages. Always independent, money
could only add ease and opportunities for gratifying minor tastes. He
spends the winter at Quatre Chemins near Grasse, in the south of France,
the summer at the ancient Benedictine Abbey of St. Wandrille, in the
Department of Seine-Inferieure. But there is hardly a moment when Madame
Maeterlinck is not a part of his life and work. She plays “Macbeth” in
her husband’s translation, while he smokes a pipe of peace as well as in
solitude. The pipe, according to Gerard Harry, contains a denicotinised
herb; for thus, by a piece of heroism discovered by his hero-worshipper,
Maeterlinck circumvents his insatiable craving for tobacco in his working
hours. “By wise disposition,” says Madame Maeterlinck, “he has reduced
his weakness, economised his strength, balanced his faculties, multiplied
his energies, disciplined his instincts.”

“Yet,” says Mr. Thomas, “he continues to write. He is early to rise and
go to his garden and his bees, for which his liking is now near thirty
years old. Two hours, always exactly two hours, of work follow. Then
he goes out again, canoeing, motoring, cycling, or walking. He reads in
the evening and goes to bed in good time.” The work of these two hours
is prepared easily and quietly during the pleasures and other duties of
the day. Madame Maeterlinck compares him taking up his work to a child
leaving its games and going on with them as soon as allowed—an innocent
and ambiguous comparison. She implies that his work is sub-consciously
matured and methodically put on paper, and that his natural tranquillity
and the surroundings and conditions of his life have long been
felicitously combined; and she says it might seem that the mysterious
powers have woven between him and the world a veil which allows him a
clear vision whilst yet himself invisible, as they have favored him by
the gift of a home not less wonderful than the castles he imagined for
Alladine and Selysette and Maleine.

However in a consideration of “The Miracle of St. Anthony,” the life
of the man, his place as a philosopher, and his achievements as a poet
are only indirectly concerned. The little play counts first of all in
its relation to “La Princesse Maleine,” “Les Sept Princesses,” and
especially, “Les Aveugles,” and “L’Intruse.” Perhaps closest to it of
them all is “L’Intruse.” To recall that play. It does not need the Dutch
clock in the corner to fix the scene in the Lowlands. In a dimly lighted
room in an old country house the grandfather, the father, the uncle, the
three daughters are sitting about a table. It has rained the whole week
and the night without is damp and cold. In the next room lies the sick
mother. The father is hopeful, relying on the assurances of the doctors.
But not the grandfather. They are expecting some one. They speak in low
voices, at random. Besides the woman in the other room there is a young
child.

    THE UNCLE—The little one would cause me more anxiety than your
    wife. It is now several weeks since he was born, and he has
    scarcely stirred. He has not cried once all the time! He is
    like a wax doll.

    THE GRANDFATHER—I think he will be deaf—dumb, too, perhaps—the
    usual result of marriages between cousins. (_A reproving
    silence._)

    THE FATHER—I could almost wish him ill for the suffering he has
    caused his mother.

    THE UNCLE—Be reasonable. It is not the poor little thing’s
    fault. He is quite alone in the room.

More and more is the old man troubled. He complains that he can no longer
hear the nightingales, and that some one must be in the garden. The trees
in the park are trembling as if some one was brushing a way through, the
swans are scared, and the fishes diving in the pond, but the watch-dog
does not bark. Through the glass door, that some mysterious agency has
opened, the cold rushes into the room. The sound of a scythe being
sharpened is heard outside. The child that has before been silent, begins
to cry. There is a knock at the door. The Father partly opens it, and
speaks to the servant, who answers, remaining on the outside.

    THE GRANDFATHER—Your sister is at the door?

    THE UNCLE—I can see only the servant.

    THE FATHER—It was only the servant. (_To the servant_) Who was
    that, that came into the house?

A note is struck similar to one used later by Lord Dunsany in “A Night
at an Inn.” Some invisible force is pushing open the door. The servant
protests that it is not she, as she is standing three yards away from the
door. The Grandfather is conscious of a new presence. “And who is that
sitting there?” he asks. “But there is no one there,” he is told. But he
will not believe them, maintaining that in pity they are deceiving him. A
ray of moon-light penetrates, throwing strange gleams. The clock strikes
midnight; at the last stroke there is a sound as of some one rising in
haste. Cries of terror from the child’s room: quick and heavy steps.
Then silence. The door of the sick woman’s room slowly opens, and the
Sister of Mercy appears on the threshold. She bows as she makes the sign
of the Cross.

In “Les Aveugles” Maeterlinck turned from a typically Flemish setting to
a forest on a small island—“a very ancient northern forest, eternal of
aspect, beneath a sky profoundly starred.” Six old blind men are on the
right, and six old blind women on the left. They are from a Home for the
Blind and they are in the charge of a priest—a very old priest, wrapped
in a wide black cloak, and whose eyes, “dumb and fixed, no longer gaze at
the visible side of eternity, and seem bleeding beneath a multitude of
immemorial sorrows and of tears.” Fear is in the hearts of the priest’s
charges. They are startled by the flutter of wings, by the touch of the
falling snow, by the barking of dogs. They understand nothing save the
sound of the sea and they do not know how near that is. In the priest’s
company they have been exploring their island, which has “a mountain that
no one has climbed, valleys with no one to go down to, and caves that
have not been entered to this day.” They know not yet that the priest is
dead, but they are conscious that something has happened to him. They
offer conjectures, they dig into the past, they deplore their state. At
length one of the men is led by a dog to the center, where the body of
the priest is. He touches a face. The others follow and recognise by
feeling the features of their protector. What are they to do? The only
seeing eyes are those of a child at its mother’s breast. The child cries
at a noise, and they think that it must be something and move towards the
sound that has provoked the cry. Their hope is that the men from the
light-house will see them. At last the footsteps stop. “Who are you?”
asks the child’s mother. But only silence. “Have pity on us,” cries the
oldest blind woman.

“It is not necessary to the effectiveness of this piece,” Mr. Thomas
has written, “that we should believe the blind to represent mankind
bewildered after the loss of religion, their old guide. Whether it is
true or not that religion is dead and men blind without it, the thought
is so stale that in its nakedness it could be of no value to any piece
of writing. But the sight of a blind man sitting still or tapping
in the street is always impressive; and to the blind company in the
play are added many elements of mystery and terror which enhance this
impressiveness. They have at the start little more humanity than the
rocks and trees among which they sit, except that they are conscious of
themselves and one another. They are like creatures suddenly made out of
the rocks and trees; and it is easy to picture beings of equal humanity
standing in the depths of a misty wood when rain falls all through the
day at autumn’s end. Or they are like personifications, so that we feel
no curiosity with the name of any but that one who says for Maeterlinck:

    We have never seen one another. We ask one another questions,
    and we reply; we live together, we are always together, but we
    know not what we are.”

It was Maeterlinck’s very first play, “La Princesse Maleine,” that won
for him the dangerous title of “The Belgian Shakespeare.” Now and then
a writer of our own land has done something that has caused limited
or injudicious critics to speak of him as “The American Dickens” or
“The American Thackeray.” As a rule he has paid a sad price for the
unfortunate comparison. No matter how innocent the man himself has been,
the chorus of mocking, unthinking laughter has been inevitable. In the
case of Maeterlinck ridicule was only momentary. The rush of subsequent
achievement was so swift. The world had had hardly time to gasp at Octave
Mirbeau’s “The Belgian Shakespeare” before some one else was referring to
Maeterlinck as “The Belgian Emerson.” But it did not need the acute mind
of a Mirbeau to find the first comparison. That was obvious. How obvious
a few references to “La Princesse Maleine” will show. To Maleine herself
there is a flavor of Ophelia. The castle of Marcellos, her father, king
of a part of Holland, might be the Castle of Elsinore. There, when the
play opens, is being held the banquet to celebrate the betrothal of
Maleine and Prince Hjalmar. The watching guards gossip of the attentions
that the Prince’s father, old Hjalmar, king of another part of Holland,
has been paying to the exiled Queen Ann of Jutland. A quarrel between the
two kings over the table leads to war, and in an attack on the castle
most of the defenders are killed and Maleine disappears. Through a hole
in the wall of the tower in which Maleine and her nurse are shut up for
safety, they see that the whole land has been laid waste by war and fire.

In the course of subsequent adventures Maleine becomes the attendant of
Uglyane, the daughter of the wicked Queen Ann, whom Hjalmar is now to
marry. In that capacity she carries to her mistress a false message
saying that Hjalmar is not going to keep a tryst, and instead goes
herself. Later there is a knocking at a door, and Maleine enters in the
white robes of a bride. Queen Ann tells old Hjalmar that he must choose
between herself and the returned Princess, and plans to make use of a
poison, which the physician determines to make harmless. Then there is
another storm, and Maleine is alone in the night with a large black dog
quivering in a corner of the room. Old Hjalmar and Queen Ann come to
her door, and pretending to do her hair, the Queen twists a rope round
Maleine’s neck and strangles her. The madman, who at Maleine’s previous
appearance, pointing at her, had made the sign of the cross, thrusts his
head in at the window but is hurled back into the moat by the king. The
murderess puts the corpse to bed. In the fifth and last act the same
storm is raging. The castle is struck by lightning and a mass falls into
the moat. Within all are asking for the king and Queen Ann. When they
enter there are bloodstains in the king’s white hair. Maleine’s dead body
is discovered, and the king drags in Ann, proclaiming her guilt and his
own. Hjalmar stabs the murderess and then kills himself.

In “Les Sept Princesses” there is a vast hall of marble with seven white
marble steps covered by seven pale silken cushions on which the seven
princesses are sleeping. The sun is setting, and in its fading light may
be seen a black marshy country and oak and pine forests. Along the canal
between dark willows, a great warship advances. On the terrace the old
king and queen and a messenger watch the approaching vessel. The king’s
vision fails him and it is the queen who describes the full spread of
sail touching the willows, and the oars like a thousand legs. From the
ship, when the anchor drops, the prince descends. He is shown the seven
sleepers, who are not to be awakened, as the doctor has forbidden it.
“How white they are, all seven! Oh, how beautiful they are, all seven!
How pale, how strange they are, all seven! But why are they asleep, all
seven?” says the prince. He indicates his preference for one of the
seven. “That,” says the queen, “is Ursula, who has waited seven years
for her lover.” The others are Genevieve, Helen, Cristabel, Madeleine,
Claire, and Claribella. Why was Marcellus so long in coming? Night and
day they have been watching along the canal. The sailors turn the ship
to a monotonous song with the burden, “We shall return no more, we shall
return no more.” The sisters still sleep. The queen is frightened at the
plight of her granddaughters and sobs against the window, the watchers
seek to enter, but neither door nor window can be opened. The king and
Marcellus make their way in through a subterranean passage. All the
sleepers but Ursula awake. “She is not asleep,” says the queen. “Pour
water on her.... Open the door.... It is too late.... Shut! shut!” All
cry, shaking the door, and knocking at the window: “Open, open!” A black
curtain falls.

“Nobody,” says Mr. Thomas, “who has read ‘Les Aveugles’ and ‘L’Intruse’
could doubt the authorship of ‘Les Sept Princesses.’ Here are the same
agitated, helpless people speaking in abrupt, simple, and oft-repeated
phrases. Here again, something is going on which they do not understand,
and are impotent to arrest or change. But the matter of both earlier
plays was a not improbable incident which was developed, it may be
extravagantly, but in a manner that touched human beings. If ‘Les
Aveugles’ was extraordinary, while ‘L’Intruse’ was not extraordinary
in any way, both were easy to understand. But ‘Les Sept Princesses’ is
a picture drawn for its own sake. It has its logic, but the elements
in it seem chosen, like those of ‘La Princesse Maleine,’ because they
are attractive in themselves—the marble hall and stairs, the terrace,
the dark land of marshes and forests, the canal and the warship, the
seven princesses in white sleeping on the stairs, the swans, the prince
arriving to claim one of them and finding her at last dead, the old king
and queen shut outside the hall and knocking vainly at the windows;
only, these elements are combined without any of the unwieldiness of ‘La
Princesse Maleine,’ without interfering with themselves or with anything
else. It is simply a picture in Maeterlinck’s manner, and this manner has
the effect of creating a feeling of helplessness and smallness in the
presence of fate and the earth.”

It was not until a later period that Maeterlinck came under the influence
of the American Emerson. “A Belgian Emerson,” Mr. James Huneker has said,
“but an Emerson who had in him much of Edgar Allan Poe.” Surely it was
not through Emerson that Maeterlinck found the author of “The Raven.” Nor
is it certain that there was any direct inspiration at all. More likely
it is that the same visions burned early in the brain of the Flemish
mystic that had seethed in the mind of the gifted, erratic American half
a century before. There was no need for him to know “The House of Usher”
of the Poe tale. Was there not a House of Usher perched on every Flemish
hill, at the bottom of every Flemish valley? Was not the man a forerunner
of Maeterlinck who wrote this?

“Now there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi—in the iron-bound
melancholy volumes of the Magi. Therein, I say, are glorious histories of
the heaven and of the earth, and of the mighty sea—and of the genius that
over-ruled the sea, and the earth, and the lofty heaven. There was much
lore, too, in the sayings that were said by the Sybils, and holy, holy
things were heard of old by the dim leaves which trembled round Dodona,
but as Allah liveth, that fable which the Demon told me as he sat by my
side in the shadow of the tomb, I hold to be the most wonderful of all.”

Or this?

“And then did we, the seven, start from our seats in horror and stand
trembling and aghast, for the tones in the voice of the shadow were not
the tones of any one being, but of a multitude of beings, and, varying
in their cadences from syllable to syllable, fell duskily upon our ears
in the well-remembered and familiar accents of many thousand departed
friends.”

The landscape of most of those early Maeterlinck plays is the landscape
of “Ulalume”:

    The skies they were ashen and sober,
    The leaves they were crisped and sear,
    It was night in the lonesome October
    In my most immemorial year.
    It was hard by the dim lake of Auber
    In the misty mid-region of Weir,
    It was down by the dark tarn of Auber
    In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

But it was a more material setting that Maeterlinck gave to “The Miracle
of St. Anthony.” Not the intangible Nowhere or the impalpable At any
Time, but the present day, a commonplace house, and a small provincial
town in the Low Countries. Instead of stately marble pillars, or primeval
forest, or limitless sea, a room with leather-covered benches against
the walls, two wooden stoves and an umbrella stand, on which are hats, a
cape and wraps. Instead of swans and sleeping beauties, the old drudge
Virginie, with her skirts turned up and her legs bare, swabbing the
floor. In the next room is lying the body of the Maiden Lady Hortensia,
who in her lifetime had been exceedingly generous in her donations to
the church, and especially devoted to the memory of the blessed St.
Anthony of Padua. It is the Saint himself, come to restore her to life
as a reward for her piety, who presents himself at the door-sill as
the curtain rises. In appearance he is not as the dead woman might have
expected. Bare-headed and bare-footed, his beard and hair are scrubby
and tangled, and he is clothed in a soiled, sack-like, and much dirtied
cowl. The story of how he was received by the relatives, the doctor, the
parson, and the gathered guests may be read by those who turn to the
following pages. It was first presented to American play-goers by the
Washington Square Players under the direction of Mr. Edward Goodman at
the Bandbox Theatre in New York, the evening of May 7th, 1915. It had
the quality of novelty, for it was one of the least known of all the
plays. There was a story current at the time that it was produced from
the manuscript. What Maeterlinck himself thinks of it, what place in
his mind it has in his whole scheme of literary production, the writer
cannot say. That is a matter as elusive as the man himself is elusive. To
illustrate that elusiveness by a personal reminiscence:

It was six years ago, in the days when the world was happy with the
blessedness of a peace that seemed likely to endure, and when the
occasional cloud on the political horizon was regarded as nothing more
than a mirage, that the writer and a friend—the latter one of the firm
of M. Maeterlinck’s American publishers—made a journey to the south of
France for the purpose of paying their respects to the Belgian mystic in
his Nice home. In London we had been advised by Mr. Alexander Teixeira
de Mattos, whose admirable translations have done so much to make
Maeterlinck’s name a household name to English-speaking readers. “Here is
his latest letter,” said Mr. Teixeira. “It is dated from his villa in
the Quartier des Beaumettes, which is the rising ground at the western
end of the town. You will find him there; that is, if you succeed in
finding him at all. For he is a very difficult man to find. That is one
of his peculiarities.”

It was the night before the departure from Nice. Our time was limited. At
its môle in the swarming harbor of Marseilles, the Sant Anna, which was
to carry us on its roundabout, five thousand mile journey, with New York
as the ultimate destination, was preparing for its leaving of the next
day. We started on the quest. At the hotel they could tell us nothing.
The driver of the fiacre engaged was no better informed. Surprised but
undaunted we were soon winding slowly between high stone walls, up the
beautiful Beaumettes slope. From villa to villa we travelled, to be
met everywhere by puzzled, negative headshakes. “M. Maeterlinck? We do
not know him. We have never heard of him. We do not think that he is of
the Quartier. Perhaps if you enquire at the villa beyond you will learn
something.” For two hours in the darkness sweet scented by the breath
of the semi-tropical plants and flowers, we kept up the search. But it
was in vain. Here indeed was a prophet unknown in his own country. What
was the reason for the mystery? Was there a vast conspiracy of silence
and pretended ignorance on the part of his neighbors? Were solitude and
freedom from interruption so necessary to his being that the great man
had sworn them to secrecy? Or had he draped himself in some mysterious
veil, some figurative coat of invisible green, through which the eyes
of those who dwelt in the Quartier des Beaumettes had never been able
to see? We never found out. There was about the enigma something weird,
something almost uncanny. We had been told to seek him in a mansion by
the sea. We could hear the waves of the Mediterranean beating against the
rocks below. But was it another ocean—an ocean of the Never, Never Land
that had been meant?

    It was many and many a year ago
    In a kingdom by the sea,
    That a maiden lived, whom you all may know
    By the name of Annabel Lee;
    And this maiden she lived with no other thought
    Than to love and be loved by me.

Is there a real Maeterlinck house? we asked ourselves. Or is his
habitation of such dream stuff as the House of Usher? Is the land of
Maeterlinck a material land, or is it somewhere “hard by the dim lake of
Auber, in the misty mid-region of Weir: down by the dark tarn of Auber,
in the Ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir?”




THE MIRACLE OF SAINT ANTHONY




THE MIRACLE OF SAINT ANTHONY


    _The entrance-hall of a large old-fashioned house. Front-door
    on the left. At the back, a few steps with on the left a
    glass door with lace curtains, leading to the dining-room,
    and on the right a fair of folding glass doors, also with
    lace curtains, leading to the drawing-room. Against the wall,
    a leather-covered bench, one or two wooden stools and an
    umbrella-stand with hats and coats on it._

    _The curtain rises on VIRGINIE, the old servant. Her skirts are
    pinned up, showing her bare legs and sabots; she is surrounded
    with brass pails, swabbing-cloths, brooms and scrubbing-brushes
    and is busily washing the flagstones composing the floor. She
    stops working from time to time, blows her nose noisily and
    wipes away a big tear._

    _There is a ring at the front-door. VIRGINIE half opens it,
    revealing on the threshold a long lean old man, barefoot,
    bareheaded, with tangled hair and beard, and clad in a sort of
    frieze habit of faded brown, muddy, out of shape and patched._

VIRGINIE

(_Holding the door ajar._) This is the thirty-sixth time that I’ve been
to the door.... Another beggar! Well, what is it?

SAINT ANTHONY

Let me in.

VIRGINIE

No, you’re all over mud. Stay there. What do you want?

SAINT ANTHONY

I want to come in.

VIRGINIE

What for?

SAINT ANTHONY

To bring Mademoiselle Hortense back to life.

VIRGINIE

Bring Mademoiselle Hortense back to life? Get out! Who are you?

SAINT ANTHONY

Saint Anthony.

VIRGINIE

Of Padua?

SAINT ANTHONY

The same. (_His halo lights up and shines._)

VIRGINIE

Lord bless me, it’s true! (_She opens the door wide, falls on her knees
and mutters a prayer, with her hands folded over the handle of her broom,
after which she kisses the hem of the SAINT’S habit and continues, in
a mechanical and bewildered sing-song._) Saint Anthony, pray for us!
Blessed Saint Anthony, look down upon us! Saint Anthony, pray for us!

SAINT ANTHONY

Shut the door.

VIRGINIE

(_Gets up crossly._) Wipe your feet on the mat. (_SAINT ANTHONY wipes
them awkwardly._) No, that won’t do: rub them hard, rub them hard. (_She
closes the front door._)

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Pointing to the folding-doors._) She is laid out in there.

VIRGINIE

(_In an astonished voice of delight._) Yes, but how did you know? It’s
wonderful! She’s there, in the drawing-room.... The poor dear lady! She
was only seventy-seven. That’s no age at all, is it?... She was a very
pious and deserving lady, you know. She suffered a great deal.... And she
was very rich. They say she’s left two million francs. That’s a lot of
money.

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

It all goes to her two nephews, Monsieur Gustave and Monsieur Achille.
And she’s left legacies to the Rector, to the church, to the beadle, to
the sacristan, to the poor, to the Curate, to fourteen Jesuits and to all
the servants, according to the length of time that they were with her.
I get most. I’ve been in her service for thirty-three years, so I shall
have three thousand three hundred francs. That’s a good sum.

SAINT ANTHONY

It is.

VIRGINIE

She owed me nothing; she always paid me my wages regularly. You can say
what you like, you won’t find many mistresses who would do as much, after
they were dead and gone. She was one of the best of women. And we’re
burying her to-day.... Everybody has sent flowers. You ought to see the
drawing-room. It’s a glorious sight. There are flowers on the bed, on the
table, on the chairs, on the piano. And nothing but white flowers: it’s
perfectly beautiful. We simply don’t know where to put the wreaths. (_A
ring at the door. She opens it and returns with two wreaths._) Here are
two more. (_Examines the wreaths and weighs them in her hands._) Aren’t
these lovely? Just hold them a minute till I finish my work. (_She gives
the wreaths to SAINT ANTHONY, who takes one in each hand obligingly._)
They’re taking her to the cemetery this afternoon. Everything has to be
nice and clean; and I’ve only time to....

SAINT ANTHONY

Take me to the corpse.

VIRGINIE

Take you to the corpse? Now?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

No, it can’t be done. You must wait a bit; they are still at lunch.

SAINT ANTHONY

God bids me hurry; there is no time to lose.

VIRGINIE

What do you want with her?

SAINT ANTHONY

I’ve told you: I want to bring her back to life.

VIRGINIE

You want to bring her back to life? Seriously, do you want to raise her
from the dead?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

But she’s been dead three days.

SAINT ANTHONY

That’s why I wish to raise her from the dead.

VIRGINIE

For her to live again as before?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

But then there won’t be any heirs?

SAINT ANTHONY

Of course not.

VIRGINIE

But what will Monsieur Gustave say?

SAINT ANTHONY

I don’t know.

VIRGINIE

And will she take back the three thousand three hundred francs which she
gave me because she was dead?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes, of course.

VIRGINIE

That’s a nuisance.

SAINT ANTHONY

Have you no other money, no savings?

VIRGINIE

Not a farthing. I have an invalid sister who takes every penny I earn.

SAINT ANTHONY

Well, if you are afraid of losing your three thousand francs....

VIRGINIE

Three thousand three hundred francs....

SAINT ANTHONY

If you’re afraid of losing the money, then I won’t raise her from the
dead.

VIRGINIE

Couldn’t I keep the money and you bring her back to life just the same?

SAINT ANTHONY

No, you must take it or leave it. I came down in answer to your prayers:
it’s for you to choose.

VIRGINIE

(_After a moment’s reflection._) Well, then, bring her back to life all
the same. (_The SAINT’S halo lights up and shines._) What’s the matter
with you now?

SAINT ANTHONY

You have pleased me.

VIRGINIE

And then does that lantern thing light up?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes, of itself.

VIRGINIE

That’s funny.... But don’t stand so near the lace curtains, or you’ll set
them on fire.

SAINT ANTHONY

There’s no danger: it’s celestial flame.... Take me to the body.

VIRGINIE

I’ve told you: you must wait. I can’t disturb them now. They’re still at
lunch.

SAINT ANTHONY

Who?

VIRGINIE

Why, my masters, of course! The whole family! First her two nephews,
Monsieur Gustave and Monsieur Achille, with their wives and children,
Monsieur Georges, Monsieur Alberic, Monsieur Alphonse and Monsieur
Désiré.... And cousins, male and female, and the Rector and the Doctor
and I don’t know who besides: friends and relatives from a distance,
whom I’d never seen. They’re very rich people.

SAINT ANTHONY

Really?

VIRGINIE

Did you notice the street?

SAINT ANTHONY

What street?

VIRGINIE

Why, ours, of course! The one in which our house stands.

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

It’s a handsome street. Well, all the houses on the left-hand side of
the street, except the little one at the end, the baker’s shop, belong
to Mademoiselle Hortense. Those on the right-hand side are Monsieur
Gustave’s. There are twenty houses. That means money.

SAINT ANTHONY

No doubt.

VIRGINIE

(_Pointing to the halo._) Look, your lantern thing is going out.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Feeling his halo._) Yes, I’m afraid....

VIRGINIE

Doesn’t it keep burning very long?

SAINT ANTHONY

It all depends upon the thoughts that feed it.

VIRGINIE

Yes, they own woods ... and farms ... and houses galore! Monsieur Gustave
has a starch-factory: Gustave’s Starch, you’ve heard of it, I expect! Oh,
they’re an amazingly well-off family. There are four of them who live on
their incomes and do no business at all. That’s splendid, that is!... And
such friends and acquaintances and tenants!... Well, they’ve all come
to the funeral, some of them from ever so far. There’s one, I’m told,
who travelled two days and two nights to get here in time. I’ll show him
to you: he has a lovely beard.... They’re lunching here. They haven’t
finished yet. We can’t disturb them. It’s a great lunch: there are
twenty-four of them sitting down to it. And I’ve seen the bill of fare:
there’s oysters, two soups, three entrées, crayfish in jelly, and trout
_à la Schubert_. Do you know what that is?

SAINT ANTHONY

No.

VIRGINIE

No more do I. They say it’s very good; but it’s not for you and me.
There’s no champagne, because of the mourning; but there’s every other
kind of wine. Mademoiselle Hortense had the best cellar in the town. I’ll
try and get you a good big glass, if they leave any; then you’ll see
the sort of thing.... Wait, I’ll go and look what they’re doing. (_She
goes up the steps, draws back the curtains and peeps through the glass
door on the left._) I think they’re beginning the trout, the trout _à
la Schubert_. Oh, there’s Joseph moving the pine-apple. They’ve a good
two hours before them. You’d better take a seat. (_SAINT ANTHONY goes
to the leather-covered bench and is about to sit down._) No, no, not
there, you’re much too dirty! Sit on the stool. I must get on with my
work. (_SAINT ANTHONY sits down on a stool; VIRGINIE resumes her work and
takes up a pail of water._) Look out! Lift up your feet; I’m going to
splash the water.... No, don’t stay there; you’re in my way; and it’s not
cleaned yet.... Go over there in the corner; push the stool against the
wall. (_SAINT ANTHONY obediently does as she tells him._) There, now you
won’t get your feet wet. Aren’t you hungry?

SAINT ANTHONY

No, thank you, but I’m rather in a hurry; so go and tell your masters.

VIRGINIE

You’re in a hurry? What have you got to do?

SAINT ANTHONY

Two or three miracles.

VIRGINIE

I can’t tell them anything while they’re at lunch. We must wait till
they’ve had their coffee. Monsieur Gustave might be very angry.... I
don’t know what sort of reception he’ll give you; he doesn’t like having
poor people in the house. You don’t look over-prosperous.

SAINT ANTHONY

No, saints are never prosperous.

VIRGINIE

They have money given them, though.

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes, but not everything that’s given to the saints reaches heaven.

VIRGINIE

You don’t mean it? Then do the priests take what we give? I’ve heard it
said; but I wouldn’t believe.... There now, I’ve got no water left!... I
say!

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes?

VIRGINIE

Do you see a brass tap on your right?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

VIRGINIE

There’s an empty pail beside it. Would you mind filling it for me?

SAINT ANTHONY

With pleasure.

VIRGINIE

You see, I’ll never get all this cleaning done if some one doesn’t help
me. And there’s nobody to help me: they’re all losing their heads....
It’s a terrible job, a death in the house! You know that as well as I do.
A good thing it doesn’t happen every day.... Monsieur Gustave will make a
fuss if everything isn’t clean and shining when his guests come through
here.... He’s not easy to please.... And I still have all the brass to
do.... There, turn the tap; that’s right.... Bring me the pail.... Aren’t
your feet cold? Tuck up your gown or it’ll get wet.... Mind the wreaths;
put them on the stool.... That’s right, that’s capital. (_SAINT ANTHONY
brings her the pail_.) Thanks, you’re very kind.... I want one more.
(_A sound of voices and of chairs being pushed back._) Listen! What’s
that? I’ll go and see. (_She goes to the glass door._) Hallo, the master
has got up! What can it be? Have they quarrelled?... No, the others are
eating.... Joseph is filling up the Rector’s glass.... They are finishing
the trout.... The master is coming to the door.... Why, I might speak to
him as he comes out and tell him that you....

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes, do, please; tell him at once.

VIRGINIE

Very well. Put down the pail; I don’t want it. Here, take this broom. Not
like that! You’d better sit down again. (_SAINT ANTHONY obeys and sits
on the two wreaths lying on the stool._) Hi, what are you doing? You’re
sitting on the wreaths!

SAINT ANTHONY

I beg your pardon. I’m a little short-sighted.

VIRGINIE

Clumsy! They’re a pretty sight now! And what Monsieur Gustave will say
when he sees those two wreaths!... Thank goodness, they’re not so bad
after all! We can put them right. Sit down over there; take them on your
knees; and keep quite quiet. (_She goes down on her knees before the
SAINT._) I have a favour to ask you.

SAINT ANTHONY

Speak, don’t be afraid.

VIRGINIE

Give me your blessing, while we are by ourselves. When the company comes
out, I shall be sent away; and I sha’n’t see you any more. Give me your
blessing for myself alone. I am old and need it badly.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Rises and blesses her. His halo lights up._) I bless you, my daughter,
for you are good, simple of heart and mind, faultless, fearless,
guileless in the presence of the great mysteries and faithful in the
performance of your little duties. Go in peace, my child. Go and tell
your masters....

    (_Exit VIRGINIE. SAINT ANTHONY sits down again on the stool.
    Presently the glass door opens and GUSTAVE enters, followed by
    VIRGINIE._)

GUSTAVE

(_In a harsh and angry voice._) What’s all this? Who are you? What do you
want?

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Rising humbly._) I am Saint Anthony.

GUSTAVE

Are you mad?

SAINT ANTHONY

Of Padua.

GUSTAVE

What sort of joke is this? I am in no mood for laughing. Have you been
drinking? Come, what are you here for? What do you want?...

SAINT ANTHONY

I want to raise your aunt from the dead.

GUSTAVE

What? Raise my aunt from the dead? (_To VIRGINIE._) He’s drunk. Why did
you let him in? (_To SAINT ANTHONY._) Look here, my man, be sensible: we
have no time for jesting. My aunt is to be buried to-day; you can call
again to-morrow. Here. Here’s a trifle for you.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_With gentle persistence._) I must raise her from the dead to-day.

GUSTAVE

All right, presently, after the ceremony! Come, here’s the door.

SAINT ANTHONY

I shall not leave until I have brought her back to life.

GUSTAVE

(_Blazing out._) Look here, I’ve had enough of this! You’re getting
tiresome! My guests are waiting for me. (_He opens the front-door._)
Here’s the door. Look sharp, please!

SAINT ANTHONY

I shall not leave until I have brought her back to life.

GUSTAVE

Oh, won’t you? We’ll see about that. (_Opens the glass door and calls
out._) Joseph!

JOSEPH

(_Appears in the doorway, with a large steaming dish in his hands._) Yes,
sir?

GUSTAVE

(_Glancing at the dish._) What’s that?

JOSEPH

The partridges, sir.

GUSTAVE

Give the dish to Virginie and turn this drunken fellow out of doors. And
be quick about it.

JOSEPH

(_Handing VIRGINIE the dish._) Very good, sir. (_Going up to the SAINT._)
Come on, old fellow, didn’t you hear? It’s all very well getting tight;
you’ve got to pull yourself together now. Come on! Get out of this! You’d
better come quietly, or you’ll regret it: I can be pretty rough when I
like. You won’t? You just wait! Open the door, Virginie....

GUSTAVE

Wait, I’ll open it. (_Opens the street-door._)

JOSEPH

That’s it; we’ll soon get rid of him now. (_Turning up his sleeves and
spitting in his hands._) I’m going to show you what’s what. (_He grasps
SAINT ANTHONY firmly, with the intention of flinging him into the street.
The SAINT stands rooted to the spot, JOSEPH looks nonplussed._) Sir!

GUSTAVE

What’s the matter?

JOSEPH

I don’t know, sir. He seems fixed. I can’t get him to budge.

GUSTAVE

I’ll help you. (_Both of them try to push SAINT ANTHONY out, but he
remains immovable. GUSTAVE, in an undertone._) Well, upon my soul! He’s
dangerous. Be careful. He has the strength of a Hercules. Let’s try
being gentle with him. (_To SAINT ANTHONY._) Listen to me, my friend. You
understand, don’t you, that, on a day like this, when we’re burying my
aunt, my poor dear aunt....

SAINT ANTHONY

I have come to raise her from the dead....

GUSTAVE

But you understand, surely, that this is not the moment.... The
partridges are getting cold, the guests are waiting. Besides we are not
in the mood for laughing.

ACHILLE

(_Appears at the top of the steps, napkin in hand._) What’s the matter,
Gustave? What’s up? We’re waiting for the partridges.

GUSTAVE

Our friend here refuses to go away.

ACHILLE

Is he boozed?

GUSTAVE

Well, of course.

ACHILLE

Kick him out and have done with it. I don’t see why our good luncheon
should be spoilt for the sake of a dirty drunkard.

GUSTAVE

He won’t go.

ACHILLE

What’s that? Won’t go? We’ll soon see about that!...

GUSTAVE

All right, you try.

ACHILLE

I’m not going to tackle a dirty tramp like him. But there’s Joseph,
there’s the coachman.

GUSTAVE

We have tried; it’s no use; and, short of employing absolute violence....

    (_More GUESTS appear at the door, most of them with their
    mouths full, some with their napkins under their arms, others
    with them tucked under their chins._)

A GUEST

What’s it all about?

ANOTHER

What are you doing, Gustave?

ANOTHER

What does the fellow want?

ANOTHER

Where has he sprung from?

GUSTAVE

He won’t go away. It’s another of Virginie’s blunders. As soon as she
catches sight of a beggar, she loses her head. It’s really too silly. She
let this madman in; and he insists on seeing Aunt Hortense and raising
her from the dead.

A GUEST

You should send for the police. Why don’t you?

GUSTAVE

No, no; no scandal! I don’t want the police in the house on a day like
this.

ACHILLE

(_Changing his tone._) Gustave.

GUSTAVE

Well?

ACHILLE

Have you noticed that two or three of the flags are cracked, over there
on the left, at the end of the hall?

GUSTAVE

Yes, I know. It doesn’t matter; I’m going to have a mosaic floor to take
the place of the flags.

ACHILLE

That’ll look more cheerful....

GUSTAVE

And, better still, more modern. Instead of that door, with the lace
curtains, I thought of having a painted window illustrating Hunting,
Industry and Progress, with a garland of fruit and game.

ACHILLE

Yes, that will be very nice.

GUSTAVE

As for my office, I intend to have it in there (_pointing to the
folding-doors_), with the clerks’ office opposite.

ACHILLE

When shall you move in?

GUSTAVE

A few days after the funeral. It would not do to come in the very next
day.

ACHILLE

No. But meanwhile we must get rid of this chap.

GUSTAVE

He’s made himself quite at home.

ACHILLE

(_To SAINT ANTHONY._) Won’t you have a chair?

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Naïvely._) No, thank you. I’m not tired.

ACHILLE

Leave him to me. I’ll soon dispose of him. (_Approaching the SAINT, in a
friendly tone._) Come, my friend, tell us who you are.

SAINT ANTHONY

I am Saint Anthony.

ACHILLE

Yes, yes, you’re right. (_To the others._) He sticks to it, but he’s
quite harmless. (_Noticing the RECTOR among the GUESTS who have crowded
around SAINT ANTHONY and giving him an artful and chaffing look._) And
here’s the Rector; he knows you, and wants to pay you his respects.
Saints are your business, Father: I know more about ploughs and
traction-engines. Here’s an emissary from heaven, Father, great Saint
Anthony in person, who would like a word with you. (_Under his breath to
the RECTOR._) We want to get him quietly to the door, without letting him
know. Once he is outside, good-bye.

THE RECTOR

(_In an unctuously paternal tone._) Great Saint Anthony, your humble
servant bids you welcome to this world, which you have deigned to honour
with your celestial presence. What does your Holiness wish?

SAINT ANTHONY

To raise Mademoiselle Hortense from the dead.

THE RECTOR

It’s true that she’s dead, poor lady! Well, the miracle should present
no difficulty to the greatest of our saints. The dear departed had a
particular devotion to you. I will take you to her, if your Holiness will
be good enough to come with me. (_He goes to the street-door and beckons
to SAINT ANTHONY._) This way, please.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Pointing to the folding-doors._) No, that way, in there....

THE RECTOR

(_Still more unctuously._) Your Holiness will pardon me if I venture to
contradict you, but the corpse, because of the influx of visitors, has
been removed to the house opposite, which, I may mention, also belonged
to the dear departed.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Pointing to the folding-doors._) She is in there.

THE RECTOR

(_More and more unctuously._) Let me beg your Holiness, in order to
convince yourself to the contrary, to accompany me for a moment into the
street, where you will see the candles and the black hangings....

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Imperturbably, still pointing to the folding-doors._) That is where I
shall go.

A GUEST

Did you ever hear any one like him?

GUSTAVE

He’s going a trifle too far.

A GUEST

Let us open the door and all of us push him out together.

GUSTAVE

No, no; no scene! He might lose his temper. He’s very dangerous; he’s
enormously strong. Keep your hands off him. Joseph and I, who are no
weaklings, either of us, couldn’t make him move an inch. It’s funny, but
he seems rooted to the soil.

ACHILLE

But who told him that the corpse was in there?

GUSTAVE

Virginie, of course; she’s been babbling for all she’s worth.

VIRGINIE

Me, sir? Excuse me, sir, not me; I was attending to my work. I answered
yes and no, nothing else.... Didn’t I, Saint Anthony? (_The SAINT makes
no reply._) Well, can’t you answer when you’re asked a civil question?

SAINT ANTHONY

She did not tell me.

VIRGINIE

There, you see! He’s a saint; he knew it all beforehand. I tell you,
there’s nothing he doesn’t know.

ACHILLE

(_Going to the SAINT and tapping him amicably on the shoulder._) Now
then, my fine fellow, come on; put your best foot forward, what!

THE GUESTS

Will he go, or won’t he?

ACHILLE

I have an idea.

GUSTAVE

What’s that?

ACHILLE

Where’s the doctor?

A GUEST

He’s still at table; he’s finishing up the trout....

GUSTAVE

(_To JOSEPH._) Go and fetch him. (_Exit JOSEPH._) You’re right, he’s a
madman; it’s the doctor’s business. (_Enter JOSEPH and the DOCTOR._)

THE DOCTOR

(_Appears with his mouth full and his napkin tucked under his chin._)
What’s up? Is he mad? Is he ill? Is he drunk? (_Looking the SAINT
over._) Why, it’s a beggar! I’m of no use in his case. Well, my friend,
are things going badly? Is there something we want?

SAINT ANTHONY

I want to raise Mademoiselle Hortense from the dead.

THE DOCTOR

Ah, I see you’re not a medical man! May I have your hand? (_Feels the
SAINT’S pulse._) Any pain?

SAINT ANTHONY

No.

THE DOCTOR

(_Feeling his head and forehead._) And here? Does it hurt when I press my
finger?

SAINT ANTHONY

No.

THE DOCTOR

Excellent, excellent! Do you ever feel giddy?

SAINT ANTHONY

Never.

THE DOCTOR

And in the past ... no accident, at any time? Let’s have a look at your
chest. Say “Ah!” That’s right. Once more; deep breath. Deeper, deeper.
That’s right.... And what is it you want, my man?

SAINT ANTHONY

To go into that room.

THE DOCTOR

What for?

SAINT ANTHONY

To raise Mademoiselle Hortense from the dead.

THE DOCTOR

She’s not there.

SAINT ANTHONY

She is there. I see her.

GUSTAVE

He sticks to it.

ACHILLE

Couldn’t you give him a hypodermic injection?

THE DOCTOR

What for?

ACHILLE

To send him to sleep. Then we would put him in the street.

THE DOCTOR

No, no; no nonsense. Besides, it’s dangerous.

ACHILLE

That’s his look out, not ours. We’re not paid to take care of madmen,
tramps or drunkards.

THE DOCTOR

Shall I give you my opinion?

GUSTAVE

I wish you would.

THE DOCTOR

We have to do with a madman, a rather feeble-minded and quite harmless
monomaniac, who may become dangerous, however, if we thwart him. I
know the type.... We are among ourselves; moreover, strange though the
experiment which he proposes may seem, it involves no lack of respect
for the dear departed.... That being so, I don’t see why, in order to
avoid any scandal and since he’s asking such a simple thing, we shouldn’t
allow him to go into the room for a moment.

GUSTAVE

Never! What’s the world coming to, if the first person that comes along
can force his way like this into a respectable household, under the
ridiculous pretext of bringing back to life a dead woman who has never
done him any harm?

THE DOCTOR

As you please; it’s for you to decide. On the one hand, you have an
inevitable scandal, for nothing will make him give up his idea; on the
other, a small concession which costs you nothing.

ACHILLE

The doctor’s right....

THE DOCTOR

There’s nothing to be afraid of. I’ll take the whole responsibility.
Besides, we shall all be there and we shall go in with him.

GUSTAVE

Very well, then, let’s have done with it.... But, whatever happens, don’t
let this ludicrous incident get about, will you?

ACHILLE

Aunt Hortense’s jewels are put out on the mantelpiece....

GUSTAVE

I know. I’ll keep an eye on them, for I confess that I don’t trust him.
(_To SAINT ANTHONY._) It’s this way, come in. But be quick about it; we
haven’t lunched yet.

    (_GUSTAVE opens the folding-doors, revealing the drawing-room,
    in which is a large four-poster, with MADEMOISELLE HORTENSE’S
    body laid out upon it. Two lighted candles, a crucifix, a
    branch of palm, wreaths. At the back, a glass door leading to
    the garden. ALL go in, SAINT ANTHONY and GUSTAVE last._)

GUSTAVE

Here is the body of the dear departed. As you see, she’s quite dead. Are
you satisfied?... And now leave us. Let us cut short the experiment. (_To
JOSEPH._) Show the gentleman out by the garden-door.

SAINT ANTHONY

Allow me. (_He walks into the middle of the room and stands at the foot
of the bed. Turning to the corpse and speaking in a loud, grave voice._)
Arise!

GUSTAVE

There, that’ll do! We can’t stand by and allow a stranger to outrage our
most sacred feelings; and I ask you once more, for the last time....

SAINT ANTHONY

Allow me, please! (_He goes nearer the bed and raises his voice more
authoritatively._) Arise!

GUSTAVE

(_Losing his patience._) That’s enough! We’ll end by quarrelling....
Come, this way: the door’s over here.

SAINT ANTHONY

Allow me!... She is very far away. (_In a deeper and more commanding
tone._) Mademoiselle Hortense, return and arise from the dead.

    (_To the general amazement, the dead woman first makes
    a slight movement and then opens her eyes, unfolds her
    hands, raises herself slowly to a sitting posture, puts her
    night-cap straight and looks round the room with a crabbed
    and discontented air. Next she begins quietly to scratch at a
    bit of candle-grease which she has discovered on the sleeve
    of her night-gown. There is a moment of overpowering silence;
    then VIRGINIE starts from the bewildered group, runs up to the
    bed and flings herself into the arms of the woman restored to
    life._)

VIRGINIE

Mademoiselle Hortense! She’s alive! Look, she’s scratching at a bit of
candle-grease; she’s feeling for her glasses.... Here they are! Here
they are!... Saint Anthony! Saint Anthony!... A miracle! A miracle!... On
your knees! On your knees!

GUSTAVE

Come, come, be still!... Don’t talk nonsense!... This is no time for....

ACHILLE

There’s no denying it, she’s alive.

A GUEST

But it’s not possible! What has he done to her?

GUSTAVE

You can’t take it seriously. She’ll have a relapse.

ACHILLE

No, no, I assure you. Just see how she’s staring at us.

GUSTAVE

I don’t believe it yet. What are we coming to? Where are the laws of
nature? Doctor, what do you say?

THE DOCTOR

(_Embarrassed._) What do I say? What would you have me say? It doesn’t
concern me, it’s not my business. It’s absurd and, at the same time,
quite simple. If she’s alive, then she was never dead. There’s no reason
to be amazed and proclaim a miracle.

GUSTAVE

But you yourself said....

THE DOCTOR

I said, I said.... To begin with, I said nothing positive; and I would
have you observe that I have not signed the death-certificate. I even had
very serious doubts, but I would not tell you of them, lest I should
raise false hopes.... In any case, all this proves nothing; and it is
very unlikely that she will live long.

ACHILLE

Meanwhile we must accept the evidence, the happy evidence, of our senses.

VIRGINIE

Yes, yes, we must believe it! There’s not a doubt left! I told you he was
a saint, a great saint! Just look at her! She’s alive and as fresh as a
rose in June!

GUSTAVE

(_Going to the bed and kissing MADEMOISELLE HORTENSE._) Aunt, my dear
aunt, is it really you?

ACHILLE

(_Going to the bed._) Do you know me, aunt? I am Achille, your nephew,
Achille.

LÉONTINE

And me, auntie? I am your old niece Léontine.

VALENTINE

And me, my dear godmother, do you know me? I am little Valentine, to whom
you left all your silver.

GUSTAVE

She’s smiling.

ACHILLE

Not at all, she looks displeased.

GUSTAVE

But she recognizes us all.

ACHILLE

(_Seeing MADEMOISELLE HORTENSE open her mouth and move her lips._)
Listen! She’s going to speak.

VIRGINIE

Heavenly Father!... And she has seen God!... She’ll tell us about the
delights of Paradise!... On your knees! On your knees!

ACHILLE

Listen! Listen!

MADEMOISELLE HORTENSE

(_Eyeing SAINT ANTHONY with scorn and disgust. In a shrill and angry
voice._) Who is this person? Who has dared to let a bare-footed tramp
into my drawing-room? He’s dirtied all the carpets as it is!... Put him
out at once!... Virginie, how often have I told you not to let beggars....

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Raising his hand imperiously._) Silence!

    (_The AUNT stops suddenly in the middle of her sentence, and
    sits up open-mouthed, unable to utter a sound._)

GUSTAVE

You must forgive her, she does not yet know how much she owes you. But
we, we know. There’s no question but that what you have done was more
than most people could have done. It may have been an accident or ...
something else; upon my word, I don’t know. But what I do know is that I
am proud and happy to shake you by the hand.

SAINT ANTHONY

I should like to go, please. I have work to do.

GUSTAVE

Oh, don’t be in such a hurry! We can’t let you go like this. You shall
not leave empty-handed. I don’t know what my aunt will give you: that’s
her affair: I cannot promise anything in her name. But, for my part, I
will consult my brother-in-law; and, whether it be a coincidence or ...
something else, we will pay for the coincidence without quibbling about
the amount; and you shall have no reason to regret what you have done.
That’s so, Achille, isn’t it?

ACHILLE

Certainly, you will not regret it, on the contrary.

GUSTAVE

We are not tremendously well off; we have wives and children and we
have had our disappointments; but, after all, we know how to recognize
a kindness; and, if it were only for the honour of the family, it would
never do to have it said that a stranger, however poor, came and did us
a service without receiving a reward, a decent reward, the best reward
that in us lies, a reward in proportion to our means, which, I repeat,
are limited.... Oh, I know, there are services which nothing can repay
and which are not paid for: you need not tell me that! I know it, I
know it: don’t interrupt me. But that’s no reason why we should not do
something.... Come, what do you think we owe you? Name your own figure.
Of course, you must not ask for anything excessive; we couldn’t give it
you; but whatever seems reasonable you shall have.

ACHILLE

My brother-in-law is right: but, while the matter is arranging, I propose
to make a little collection among ourselves. That won’t prejudice you in
any way and will keep you going for a time.

SAINT ANTHONY

I want to go away, please. I have other work to do.

GUSTAVE

Other work to do! Other work to do! What work can you have to do?... No,
I can’t have that; and it’s not nice of you to suggest it. What would
people say if they heard that we let you go like this after restoring
the dear departed to us? If you won’t take money—and I understand your
delicacy of feeling and approve of it—at least you will do us the
pleasure of accepting a little keepsake? Oh, don’t be afraid: just a
trifle, a cigar-holder, or a tie-pin, or a meerschaum pipe. I could have
your name and address and the date engraved on it.

SAINT ANTHONY

No, thank you. I can accept nothing.

GUSTAVE

Do you mean that?

SAINT ANTHONY

I do.

ACHILLE

(_Taking out his cigar-case._) At any rate, you will do us the pleasure
of smoking a cigar with us. You can’t refuse that.

SAINT ANTHONY

Thank you, I do not smoke.

GUSTAVE

You’re most discouraging. Still, what would you like? You must have a
wish of some sort. You have only to speak, for everything is yours in
this house, which you have filled with gladness. It’s all yours. I can’t
say more than that. At least, all that one can honestly part with....
Why, it’s an insult to leave us like this!

ACHILLE

Look here, I have an idea that’s not half bad. As our friend won’t accept
anything—and, like my brother-in-law, I understand his delicacy, of
which, I am sure, we all approve; for life can’t be paid for and has no
price—well, since he has shown a disinterested nature which at once makes
him our equal, what I want to know is this: why should he not do us the
honour of sitting down with us and helping us finish a luncheon which
he has so happily interrupted!... What do you all say?... (_Murmurs of
restrained approval._)

GUSTAVE

That’s it! The very thing! That settles everything! How clever of you
to think of it!... (_To SAINT ANTHONY._) Well, what do you say?... By
squeezing a bit, we can easily make room for you. You shall have the seat
of honour. The partridges will be cold, but no matter: you have a good
appetite, I feel sure!... Well, that’s arranged, eh? There will be no
ceremony: we’re decent people and easy-going, as you see....

SAINT ANTHONY

No, really. You must excuse me. I’m sorry, I can’t. I’m expected
elsewhere.

GUSTAVE

Oh, come, you can’t refuse us this! Besides, who’s expecting you?

SAINT ANTHONY

Another corpse.

GUSTAVE

A corpse! Another corpse! It won’t run away! Surely you’re not going to
put a corpse before us! To throw us over for a corpse!

ACHILLE

No, I see what it is. You would rather go down to the kitchen, wouldn’t
you? You’d feel more comfortable there.

GUSTAVE

Then he can come up afterwards for coffee.

ACHILLE

Ah, he’s not refusing! He prefers that! I understand. Virginie, leave
your mistress—she doesn’t need you now—and take the gentleman down to
your kitchen. Give him some of everything. (_He taps the SAINT familiarly
on the stomach._) Ha, ha! You and Virginie are going to have a jolly
good time together! I guessed right, didn’t I, you old rogue you! You old
sly-boots!

VIRGINIE

(_In a voice of alarm._) Sir!

GUSTAVE

What is it?

VIRGINIE

I don’t know, but Mademoiselle Hortense has lost her speech again.

GUSTAVE

What? She’s lost her speech?

VIRGINIE

Yes, sir, look.... She’s opening her mouth and moving her lips and
working her hands but her voice has gone.

GUSTAVE

What is it, aunt? Is there something you want to tell us? (_She nods
assent._) And you can’t? There, there, make an effort; it’s a temporary
paralysis, that’s all. It will soon pass. (_She makes a sign that she can
no longer speak._) What’s the matter with you? What do want? (_To SAINT
ANTHONY._) What’s the meaning of this?

SAINT ANTHONY

She will never speak again.

GUSTAVE

She will never speak again? But she has been speaking. You heard her. She
even gave you a piece of her mind.

SAINT ANTHONY

It was an oversight on my part. She won’t have her voice again.

GUSTAVE

Can’t you restore it to her?

SAINT ANTHONY

No.

GUSTAVE

And when will it come back?

SAINT ANTHONY

Never.

GUSTAVE

What! Will she remain dumb to the end of her days?

SAINT ANTHONY

Yes.

GUSTAVE

Why?

SAINT ANTHONY

She has beheld mysteries which she may not reveal.

GUSTAVE

Mysteries? What mysteries?

SAINT ANTHONY

The mysteries of the dead.

GUSTAVE

The mysteries of the dead? This is a fresh joke. What do you take us
for? No, no, my lad, this won’t do! She spoke; we all heard her; we have
witnesses. You have, of malice prepense, deprived her of her power of
speech, with an object which I am beginning to see through. You’ll just
restore it at once, or....

ACHILLE

It was really not worth while bringing her back to life, to give her to
us in this condition.

GUSTAVE

If you could not give her back to us as she was before your stupid and
clumsy interference, you would have done better not to have meddled.

ACHILLE

It was a bad action.

GUSTAVE

An abuse of confidence.

ACHILLE

An abuse of confidence: that’s what it was. There is no excuse for it.

GUSTAVE

You’re expecting to blackmail us, perhaps?

ACHILLE

I suppose you think you’re dealing with a pack of fools?

GUSTAVE

Who asked you to come? I hate saying it, but I would rather see her dead
than have her back in this state. It’s too cruel, too painful for those
who love her. You can’t come like this, under the pretence of working a
miracle, and disturb the peace of the people who have done you no harm,
bringing unhappiness upon them! A nice thing. But he laughs best who
laughs last!

THE DOCTOR

Allow me. Calm yourselves. The man has done wrong, there’s no doubt of
that; but we must not blame him: he is probably unaccountable for his
actions. (_Going up to SAINT ANTHONY._) Just let me examine your eyes,
my friend. That’s it: I knew it! I would not interfere while everybody
was thanking him, much too cordially, for the miraculous resurrection
which he had wrought. I did not wish to appear to meddle with what does
not concern me. I knew what was what; and you see, as I do, that she was
not dead at all. There is nothing supernatural or mysterious about all
this. It simply means that the fellow possesses rather unusual hypnotic
powers; and he has abused them, in order to indulge in a hoax which may
be self-interested and which, in any case, is out of place. He came at
the right moment, that is all; and it is highly probable that, had he not
been here, you and I would have worked the miracle, if miracle there be.

GUSTAVE

Well, what are we to do?

THE DOCTOR

Why, prevent him from doing further mischief by having him locked up! The
man’s dangerous!

GUSTAVE

You’re right; we must put a stop to this; besides, I’ve had enough of
it.... Joseph!

JOSEPH

Sir?

GUSTAVE

Run to the police-station at the corner; fetch two policemen; tell them
to bring a pair of handcuffs with them. He’s a dangerous fellow and
capable of everything, as he has shown us only too plainly.

JOSEPH

Very well, sir. (_He runs out._)

SAINT ANTHONY

I beg leave to withdraw.

GUSTAVE

That’s right, old chap, play the innocent. It’s time you did. Yes, you
can withdraw; and with a first-class escort. You just wait and see.

    (_Enter JOSEPH, followed by a SERGEANT OF POLICE and a
    POLICEMAN._)

THE SERGEANT

(_Pointing to SAINT ANTHONY._) Is this the criminal?

GUSTAVE

That’s the man.

THE SERGEANT

(_Touching SAINT ANTHONY on the shoulder._) Where are your papers?

SAINT ANTHONY

What papers?

POLICEMAN

You haven’t any? I knew it. What’s your name?

SAINT ANTHONY

Saint Anthony.

THE SERGEANT

Saint what? Saint Anthony? That’s no name for a Christian. I want the
other, your real name.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Very gently._) I have no other.

THE SERGEANT

Keep a civil tongue in your head, will you? Where did you steal that
dressing-gown?

SAINT ANTHONY

I didn’t steal it. It’s mine.

THE SERGEANT

Then it’s I who am lying? Is that what you mean? Say it; don’t mind me!

SAINT ANTHONY

I don’t know. I think.... Perhaps you are mistaken.

THE SERGEANT

I’m making a note of your impertinent observations.... Where do you hail
from?

SAINT ANTHONY

From Padua.

THE SERGEANT

Padua? Where’s that? What department?

GUSTAVE

It’s in Italy.

THE SERGEANT

I know, I know. I wanted to make him say it. So you’re an Italian. I
thought as much. Where did you last come from?

SAINT ANTHONY

From Paradise.

THE SERGEANT

What Paradise? Where is that land of malefactors?

SAINT ANTHONY

It is the place to which the souls of those who have died in the Lord
ascend after their death.

THE SERGEANT

I see, I see, I understand! You’re coming the artful over me! You’re
pulling my leg! First you’re impudent and now you’re being clever! Very
well, your case is quite clear: we’ll soon settle it.... (_To GUSTAVE._)
Let’s hear what he has done. What has he stolen?

GUSTAVE

I can’t yet say for certain that he has stolen anything; I haven’t had
time to take stock of things; and I don’t like to accuse him without
being sure. We must be just before all things. But he has done something
more serious.

THE SERGEANT

I never doubted it.

GUSTAVE

You know the loss which we have suffered. While we were mourning the dear
departed and finishing our lunch, he made his way into the house under
some pretext or other, with intentions which you can easily guess. He
took advantage of the maid’s simplicity and credulousness to have the
door opened of the room where the body was laid out. He obviously hoped
to turn our disorder and grief to account in order to fish in troubled
waters and make a haul. He may have learnt through an accomplice that our
aunt’s jewels and silver were put out on the mantelpiece. Unfortunately
for him, our aunt was not dead. And, suddenly, seeing this repellent
figure in her room, she woke up, cried out and spoke to him roundly and
pluckily. Then, to take revenge for his discomfiture, I don’t know
how—the doctor will explain—he deprived her of the use of her speech;
and, notwithstanding our entreaties, he refuses to restore it to her,
naturally hoping to make us pay through the nose. Mind you, I am making
no accusations; I am simply stating the facts. As for the rest, you can
ask the doctor.

THE DOCTOR

I will furnish all the necessary explanations before the Commissary; if
he wishes it, I will draw up a report.

ACHILLE

Meanwhile, there’s no mistake about it: he’s either a criminal or a
madman, perhaps both. In any case, he’s a dangerous person who must
absolutely be locked up.

THE SERGEANT

That’s quite clear. We’ll get rid of him for you. (_To the POLICEMAN._)
Rabutteau!

POLICEMAN

Yes, Sergeant.

THE SERGEANT

The handcuffs.

GUSTAVE

Sergeant, it was very good of you and your mate to come round. Before
leaving us, you must do us the pleasure of taking a glass of something
with us.

THE SERGEANT

We won’t say no to that, eh, Rabutteau? Especially as the prisoner looks
like a tough customer.

GUSTAVE

Joseph, bring a bottle and some glasses. (_Exit JOSEPH._) We will all
drink to my aunt’s recovery.

THE SERGEANT

It’ll do us no harm in this weather.

GUSTAVE

Is it still raining?

THE SERGEANT

In torrents. I’ve only come the length of the street; look at my cape.

POLICEMAN

You can’t tell if it’s raining or snowing, but it’s worse than either.

(_Enter JOSEPH with a tray filled with glasses, which he hands round._)

THE SERGEANT

(_Raising his glass._) Ladies and gentlemen, your very good health!

GUSTAVE

(_Touching glasses with the SERGEANT._) Sergeant, your health! (_They all
touch glasses with the SERGEANT._) Have another?

THE SERGEANT

I don’t mind. (_Smacking his lips._) That’s good wine, that is!

SAINT ANTHONY

I’m thirsty. I should like a glass of water.

THE SERGEANT

(_Grinning._) A glass of water! D’ye hear him? You shall have some
water, my lad; you wait till we’re outside; it’ll come pouring into
your mouth.... Come, we’ve hung around long enough.... Rabutteau, the
handcuffs; and you, put out your hands....

SAINT ANTHONY

But I haven’t....

THE SERGEANT

What! Resistance and protests! That’s the last straw! They’re all alike!
(_A ring at the front-door._)

GUSTAVE

A ring at the bell! (_JOSEPH goes to the front-door._) What’s the time?
Perhaps it’s the first guests.

ACHILLE

Hardly. It’s not three yet. (_Enter the COMMISSARY OF POLICE._) Hallo,
it’s Monsieur Mitrou, the Commissary of Police!

THE COMMISSARY

Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I heard... (_Catching sight of
SAINT ANTHONY._) Why, I thought as much: it’s Saint Anthony himself, the
great Saint Anthony of Padua!...

GUSTAVE

You know him, then?

THE COMMISSARY

Know him? I should think I did know him! It’s the third time that he’s
escaped.... You know, he’s a little.... (_He taps his forehead with his
finger._) And at each escape he does the same tricks: he cures the sick,
heals cripples, practises medicine without a license—in short, commits a
number of illegal actions.... (_Goes up to SAINT ANTHONY and examines him
more attentively._) Yes, it’s he.... Or at least.... But he has changed
a good deal since his last escapade.... Anyway, if it’s not he, it must
be his brother.... There’s something that’s not quite clear to me. We’ll
look into it at the police-station. Come along, I’m in a hurry; come
along, lads, quick, to the station, to the station!

GUSTAVE

Better let him out this way, through the garden; it’ll attract less
notice. (_JOSEPH opens the garden door, admitting a whirl of rain, sleet
and wind._)

ACHILLE

Brrr, what weather! It’s raining, snowing, hailing! (_They push SAINT
ANTHONY to the door._)

VIRGINIE

(_Running up._) But, sir, the poor man!... Look, he’s bare-footed!

GUSTAVE

Well, what of it? Do you want us to send for a carriage? Or a shrine,
perhaps?

VIRGINIE

No, I’ll lend him my sabots. Take them, Saint Anthony; I have another
pair.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Putting on the sabots._) Thank you. (_His halo lights up._)

VIRGINIE

And are you putting nothing on your head? You’ll catch cold.

SAINT ANTHONY

I haven’t anything.

VIRGINIE

Take my little shawl. I’ll run and fetch you my umbrella. (_She hurries
out._)

ACHILLE

The old fool.

GUSTAVE

This is all very well, but meanwhile we’re standing in the devil of a
draught.... Come, take him to the station and let’s have an end of this.

VIRGINIE

(_Returning with an enormous umbrella, which she offers to SAINT
ANTHONY._) Here’s my umbrella.

SAINT ANTHONY

(_Showing his hands._) They’ve fastened my hands.

VIRGINIE

I’ll hold it for you. (_Standing on the threshold, she opens the umbrella
to shelter SAINT ANTHONY, who goes out between the two POLICEMEN,
followed by the COMMISSARY. The SAINT’S halo shines under the umbrella;
and the group moves away over the snow in the garden._)

GUSTAVE

(_Closing the door._) At last!

ACHILLE

A good riddance to bad rubbish!

GUSTAVE

(_Going to the bed._) Well, aunt?

ACHILLE

What’s the matter with her? She’s sinking, she’s falling back on the bed!

THE DOCTOR

(_Hurrying forward._) I don’t know.... I’m afraid....

GUSTAVE

(_Leaning over the bed._) Aunt, aunt!... Well?

THE DOCTOR

This time she is really dead. I told you so.

GUSTAVE

Impossible!

ACHILLE

But, doctor, look here! Is there nothing to be done?

THE DOCTOR

Nothing at all, I fear.

(_A pause during which all gather round the bed._)

GUSTAVE

(_The first to recover his self-possession._) What a day!...

ACHILLE

Hark to the storm!...

GUSTAVE

After all, we were a little unkind to the poor beggar. If you come to
think of it, he really did us no harm!


CURTAIN

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRACLE OF SAINT
ANTHONY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
